The Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction today presented by the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association.
This is David Cruz, Daryl Lane, and David Carson.
The subject of this show is humor and science fiction. Humor is a fairly broad term. It can
include bitter satire, it can be gentle poking fun at human nature, it might be slapstick
fars or burlesque or perhaps just the witty use of the language with punts.
Many seem to think that humor and science fiction don't necessarily mix, that perhaps
good humorist science fiction is a rarity.
But it isn't really. H. D. Wells used a lot of humor and satire in his work as in his short
story, the new accelerator where he has this potion that people take and it speeds up the
reactions tremendously. And then the escapades of these two adventurers when they get out
in the courtyard are the common next to this man's laboratory. Some of the things they
do are hilarious.
And then all through the history of science fiction, of course, if you want to call it
the mainstream of science fiction, it's very action oriented. You know, spaceships, ray
guns, aliens, robots, they're usually didn't seem to be a lot of room for humor. It was
there, but it didn't surface, I think, in the classic works, the things that mostly
made the movies and the novels.
But there are a number of authors who, when their larger body of work have written first
class science fiction, that is humorous. And the first book, which was devoted entirely
to humor and science fiction, was edited by Frederick Brown and Mac Reynolds in 1953.
It was called the science fiction carnival. And in their introduction to that work, Brown
and Reynolds brought out the fact that there's a necessity for laughter. You know, if we
can't laugh at ourselves, we're in pretty bad shape. And that science fiction has unique
qualifications to provide that laughter. And the stories in that volume, I think, were,
you know, illustrated the particular qualifications in science fiction in that area.
Even an author like Arthur C. Clarke, who one usually considers is writing about very
serious themes, such as the destiny of man, or as in 2001, for instance, and very deep
works like that, he has written some very fine humor in science fiction. He said he'd
always wanted to write a tall tale in the science fiction genre that very few people
had done it. And he wrote a volume of them, published in 1957, called Tales from the White
Heart.
One of my favorites from that collection is a story about a movie studio and their special
effects department, and they put together a ray gun for the good guys. And then the
bad guys want a better looking ray gun, so they develop a better looking ray gun for
them. And this goes back and forth and on and on until finally at the end of the story,
they develop such a fantastic special effects style weapon that it actually works. And that,
and developing it, are just wildly witty and very funny.
In exaggerated, Clarke said in his introduction that all the tales in that volume were meant
to be tall tales, deliberately impossible. But there is one branch of humor, a particular
subgenre of humor called satire, which has more of a message or more of a purpose to
it than simply entertainment. And probably this type is found more often than other
types of humor in science fiction, the satiric type. And probably one of the great classics
of all satirical science fiction novels is The Space Merchants by Frederick Pol and Cyril
Cornbluth, published in 1952.
This is a story about a society that's gone mad over advertising and big business. And
Pol and Cornbluth show this through extrapolating, or pushing forward into the future. What
we know now is advertising and showing a world where advertising is totally predominant in
the culture. Big business persuades people to buy things they don't need. And it just
pushes all the concepts behind advertising to their utmost limits of Cornbluth and Pol's
imaginations.
All of these writers have shown that humor in science fiction is not such a rarity after
all. Their work demonstrates that. But the acknowledged master of humor in the field
of science fiction is Elsprague De Camp.
De Camp has been writing first class science fiction for a long time, since 1937. If you
think about it, that puts them a couple years ahead of writers like Isaac Asimov, Robert
Heinlein, A. E. Van Voet and Theodore Sturgeon. In fact, along with these writers, De Camp
helped to form what is nostalgically called the golden age of science fiction.
Much of De Camp's early work, too, I think, was written for the influential editor John
W. Campbell. It's kind of amazing to realize, too, that De Camp is still going strong today
with over 80 books to his credit, both fiction and non-fiction. A good deal of his writing
is in the category of science fiction, although he does tend many times to get into the field
of pure fantasy. But whatever kind of work he's writing, it's notable for its humor.
And overall, I think his humor is a clever, gentle kind that pokes fun at mankind, with
sort of an affectionate tolerance behind it.
The science fiction radio show talked with Sprague De Camp about his work.
First of all, Mr. De Camp, we wonder just a little bit about your origins as a writer
back in the late 1930s. Such things as, well, the circumstances that cause you to start
writing.
Well, in 1937 and eight, I was working in the field of science fiction. I was working
in Scranton, Pennsylvania as principal of the School of Inventing and Patenting of the
International Correspondent Schools. And I had a friend in New York, an old college
roommate of mine, named John Clark, who was out of a job and looking for one. And in order
to continue to eat, he, who was a more faithful reader of the science fiction magazine than
I was at that time, wrote a couple of stories. And I used to come in, oh, once twice a month
to New York, and I'd stay at his apartment and we'd sit up late and plot a couple of
these stories. So I gave him some help with them. He sent them to F. Orlin Cremain, then
the editor of Astounding, and to everybody's surprise, he sold them. So I thought, well,
if he can do that, why can't I? So having plenty of spare time in Scranton, I wrote a
couple and sent them in. And to my surprise, they were bought. Well, at that point I said,
if we, why hasn't somebody told me about this before? It sure beats working. So I wrote
a few more stories and articles, sold some, didn't sell others. And then at the end of
19, let me see, at the beginning of 1939, I was working at another job as one of the
editors on a trade journal in New York, and I got fired in an economy purge. So I thought
instead of fooling around with these piddling editorial jobs, why don't I try freelancing?
You see, I figured that if I spent five hours a week on my own time writing and made a certain
amount of money, if I could spend 50 hours a week at it, I'd make 10 times that much.
Well, of course, there's a fallacy there because you soon run into a law of diminishing returns.
But nevertheless, I took the plunge and found that in freelancing, I earned about as much
as I had been doing, and I could be my own boss, work at my own pace, work sitting down,
and wear out all my old clothes. So except for a couple of temporary jobs and the Second
World War, in which I was in the Naval Reserve, I've been at it ever since.
Excellent. Okay. Those first couple of stories you mentioned that were published to your surprise,
was one of those hyper-polosity?
Yes, hyper-polosity and the isolinguals.
What kind of money did you get when you published those?
Well, let me see. I think it was a set of words, which means I got something like 30 or $40,
I suppose. Actually, if you ask me what was my first published story, that is a question
that can have any one of three answers. If you mean the first one I started writing,
it was the novel, Genus Homo, in collaboration with the late Schuyler Miller. But that, although
we started that back around 1936, it took us over two years to finish it, and it wasn't
published on 1941. If you mean what was the first story I completed? It was a rather amateurish
little caveman story called The Hairless Ones Come, the usual story about the conflict
between the Neanderthal men and the Cro-Man Yards, who overran Europe at the end of the
Fourth Glaciation. And that was published in 1939, I believe it was, in a short live magazine
of historical adventure called Golden Fleece. So that was the first one finished. Then the
first one published was, I believe, the Isolingales.
You obviously have a widespread reputation as a writer of humor, probably the foremost
in the field of science fiction. Do you think of yourself as a humorist? Is that a label
that you want or that you agree with?
Let's say that I'm not an exclusive professional humorist of the type of old, the late P. G.
Woodhouse, for example. But on the other hand, I do try to liven up most of my fiction with
a generous sprinkling of humor. Of course, remember that although people generally refer
to me as the science fiction writer, the reason is mainly that I made my early reputation
in that field. Actually, fiction is only about half of my output, the rest being science,
history, biography, literary criticism, and so on. And of the fictional half, aside from
the strict sense, and half is fantasy. So only about a quarter of my output is really
science fiction in a strict sense.
Yeah, no, I understand that. Back to humor for just a moment. Many critics and readers
and commentators, whatever, have said that science fiction and humor don't mix well.
A good science fiction humor, a story or novel, is sort of a rarity. What would be your comment
about that?
Well, all I can say is that it is true that there aren't a great many humorous stories
in that field. But then of course, there aren't a great many humorous stories in any genre
of fiction. Some people do it and some people don't. Now, back before the Second World War,
sorry, I'm not that old quite yet, but before the Second World War, of the active science
fiction writers in the country, there were only two who were considered humorous science
fiction writers. And I was one and Henry Kutner was the other. Curiously enough, both Henry
and I, in our private lives, were rather serious solemn fellows.
Okay. For a number of years, I've been a fan of your Harold Shea stories, the ones you
collaborated with Fletcher Pratt on. If I understand right now, the first one of those
was the roaring trumpet published around 1940 or so. Okay, how did that collaboration with
Fletcher Pratt start?
Fletcher Pratt was a military-enabled historian, among other things, and he ran a naval war
game in his apartment in New York City. Later they moved to a hired hall when the game got
too large in which people crawled around on the floor, pushing little model boats, ship
warships, models of real ships, which Fletcher whittled out at his desk while he was waiting
for the next sentence to come. They were made out of balsa wood and wires and pins and things.
And I was also an able buff, a regular reader of James fighting ships and so forth, and
I could tell you what was the armament of the French Terribler class, 5.5-inch guns,
and so on. And so was John Clark, and he got in touch with Fletcher, being more aggressive,
let us say, and less shy than I in such matters. He went around and called on him and presently
was enrolled in the naval war game, and then he brought me around to meet Fletcher, and
I was enrolled and was a regular war game player. Well, Fletcher was at that time an
established and active writer, and I was a struggling young pro, you might say. So John
said to me, hey, Fletcher says he would like to see you. He has an idea for some stories.
So I went around to Fletcher, and he proposed that he and I collaborate on a series of stories
based upon this far out theory that you can slip into any universe you want to by manipulating
the symbols of symbolic logic. I had been studying symbolic logic a little with all
its cuter symbols and things, so okay, we went to it. And that is how the 5 Harold Shea
stories originated, as well as the other practicap collaborations.
One thing that sort of interested me about that particular collaboration, it seems to
me that humor is a very, I guess, a personal thing. I've always wondered how that kind
of a writing process worked. For instance, did you write a story and he go over it? Did
you do alternate stories? How was the actual mechanics of that?
Our method of collaboration, that is to say, the one that we found that worked the best
for us was that he and I would get together on an afternoon, usually in his apartment,
and fresh out story ideas. And he would come up with one and I'd say, no, no, that's not
logical for this or that reason. Or I'd say, well, it seems to me that that's the same
storyline that Cutner had just last year, such and such a magazine, and so forth and
so on. And finally we get a story more or less beaten into shape, and I'd make notes
in shorthand, which I had taught myself, and I'd take them home and I'd write out a
synopsis of the story and submit that to Fletcher and he would make any additions or changes
that he thought desirable. And I'd type the rough draft and give it to him and he would
type the final draft. I have found in collaborations in general that it's usually better for the
younger writer of the pair to do the rough and the older one the final. The reason being
that the younger writer is up to have more energy and more facility, but the older one,
having been around longer, has a sharper critical sense at spotting illogicalities, infelicities
of expression and things of that sort, and weeding them out.
None of those stories had anything to do with Campbell, did it? John W. Campbell is an editor.
Those were entirely separate from him, weren't they?
Well, John Campbell published the first three of the Harold Shea novels.
Okay, yeah, what I was getting at was this. Say for instance the world of Norse mythology
or any of those that you construct, the consistency of it. You know, Harold Shea, none of his modern
things work, you know, the matches, the guns. In other words, there's an internal consistency
in the world even though magic works. Was that your own idea or, you know, I was thinking
of speaking...
Well, that was a common idea. I mean, both Fletcher and I had long since agreed that,
right from the start, that the most effective, that in writing fantasy, you have to be even
more careful about internal consistency than you do in writing a realistic story because
the reader's credulity is already stretched like a rubber band, you see, and if you put
extra strain on it by having some obvious contradiction, it's going to snap. At that
point, you'll probably stop reading.
Okay, good, right. Just my observation that a lot of the science fantasy that was being
written back then especially did not have that kind of consistency.
That is quite right. And I consider myself fairly good at following a train of logic
and spotting cases where people commit inconsistencies of that sort. As for example, one colleague
of mine who's with whom I have collaborated, on one night he will have a full moon and
on the next night he will have the new moon. Well, you can't do that, you know, because
it takes two weeks to get from one state to the other.
Right, yes, I agree entirely. In the Harold Shea stories, as in most or many of the other
novels you've written, at least in the science fantasy area, my observation is that your
humor comes from the unexpected things that happen when you put, say, a modern man back
into a world of legend or myth.
One of the basic elements of humor in my estimation is the element of surprise or incongruity.
In other words, a derby hat on a London businessman is not funny because they all wear them. But
a derby hat on Trudy a Caesar is, you see, because it's incongruous. And that is a very
considerable factor in humor.
Right, and to make that incongruity, I guess, obvious or effective, you had to construct,
I guess, very realistic or very accurate kinds of backgrounds. Say, if it happened in the
ancient world or a mythological world, you had to develop a highly realistic context
for it.
That's right.
Where did your knowledge, your background in ancient history and mythology and so forth
come from? Did you have to research those things heavily or?
Actually, I've always been a very heavy reader. I was reading Darwin's origin of species
through at the age of seven, you know, and things like that. And I had a pretty good
historical and mythological knowledge. But actually, for the roaring trumpet fletcher,
knew a good deal more about that than I, because he was an enthusiast for the Northern thing,
as William Morris called it, and it belonged to a group that got together in Boston and
read Icelandic sagas to each other in the original.
Well, therefore, he was way ahead of me in the matter of Norse mythology. Then, for the
second story, was laid in the world of Spencer's fairy queen. And I had never read the fairy
queen, so I sat down and euthyphally plowed right through it. I never did have quite the
enthusiasm for it. That fletcher did. I found it pretty tedious for long stretches, but
nevertheless, he thought highly of it, and he went through it. And then for the third
one, why we, I knew something about Ariostos Orlando Furioso, although I'd never read it
through, but it wasn't very difficult to get hold of a set and read them. And that furnished
the material there. Well, then we, after the Second World War, we sent Harold to the world
of the Finnish Kalevala, and that was simply a matter of getting the Everyman's Library
edition and reading through that and taking notes. And we finally had him end up where
he'd wanted to go all along, which is in the mythological Ireland of Cufolan and Queen
Maeve. And I already knew a fair amount about that, but I read up some more. So we got the
stories.
I have another question on that book. Some people have said, I've read this, that you
had a serious theme to that work that one, you know, one, can one man change the past
for the better? And I'm not sure if that was intended or if that's even a fair question,
but did you have that kind of a theme behind it?
I mean, I took that as my assumption as to whether it's so or not. I don't know. I don't
think anyone else knows either, because there's such a large factor of luck in all these historical
developments, you know, as the poet had fallen off his horse and broken his neck early in
his career. Why? What would have happened? And history is full of things like that, where
what looks like is going to be an amazing career is cut short by some adventitious circumstance.
However, my primary purpose in writing fiction has always been to entertain. And everything
else takes a secondary place. Now, I don't say that a little preaching propaganda for
causes that I personally admire like wildlife conservation, let's say, or my personal opinions
and prejudices don't sneak in now and then. But nevertheless, the main purpose is entertainment.
Some people say have said that, oh, well, such and such a story by DeCamp is a satire,
well, I don't consider myself a satirist. In other words, I don't write for the intention
or with the intention of holding up some human institution or form of action to ridicule
in the serious hope of getting people to change it. But on the other hand, the human scene
around me is so full of dramatic and absurd and comical features that it's only natural
to use them and put them in my stories. You have beautifully anticipated my next question
which was going to be that I did see a strain of gentle satire in your work and I was going
to say that if you really look around you over a good many years, you see so many funny
things that you don't have to exercise great ingenuity or imagination in order to get an
entertaining story out of it. I'm not sure I'm going to pronounce this right, but the
Gavagan's Bar is that how it's... Correct. Okay, of course, that was another collaboration
with Pratt, the story of tales from Gavagan's Bar. I was curious about the antecedents for
that kind of a frame tale, you know, with the bar and the recurring characters and so
forth. Was that something you came up with yourself or was there an antecedent for that?
It did have an antecedent and that was the Jorkin stories of Lord Dunsaney, of which
he wrote five volumes and they include some very fine little stories indeed. I was familiar
with the stories. I don't remember whether either Fletcher or I was consciously influenced
by their example when we started our Gavagan's Bar series. Fletcher just said, well, let's
write some short stories of this and that, sort of, late in the bar, you know, bar room
tall tales. And he also would write Dunsaney and I dare say he had Jorkins at the back
of his mind too. Well, by a coincidence, our friend Arthur C. Clark over in England was
just beginning his Tales of the White Heart at the same time, which is also a set of bar
room tall tales. Neither of us knew about what the other was doing.
Okay, yeah. I thought your book, anti-dated his or was before the Tales of the White Heart.
I don't know offhand what the date of publication of Tales of the White Heart was, but in any
case, I do believe it's correct that both Art and Pratt and I were working on these series
at the same time, at least they overlapped. After all, we wrote these stories over a period
of several years before they were collected in book form. They appeared in various magazines,
including the old weird tales even. Last years, it folded in 1990. I think it was a good
story in 1954. Is there anything special or unique about science fiction or science fantasy
that makes it a unique feel for a humorist? I mean, anything that you couldn't do in other
forms of fiction? Well, you can of course because of the fact that you're much less limited
as to your settings and your basic assumptions than you are in realistic fiction. It gives
you unlimited opportunities for working the essential factors of humor, such as surprise
and incongruity. So I'd say on the whole that it's a very good feel for humor. But
in a way that certain other fields are not. For example, I have never, I don't get a laugh
out of funny war stories, for example, because to me war is a pretty serious business and
not a proper subject for levity. This is David Cruz, Darrell Lane and David
Carson. This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a presentation of the Permian
Basin Science Fiction Association in conjunction with KOCV FM and Odessa College, Odessa, Texas.